This is an interview with Mary Garrison by Rose
George on April 14, 1990 at Mrs. Garrison's home
concerning her nursing in Vietnam. And in the
interest of accumulating knowledge, I'm asking
you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection in the University Archives.
Is that all right with you? That is
fine. OK. So when and where were you born? I was born
September 17, 1945, in Christian County,
Illinois. And where did you get your education? I
went to local schools, a parochial school in
Morrisonville, Illinois. It's a small Catholic
school. And then a high school at Morrisonville
Community High School. And then college, I
graduated from St. Louis University in St. Louis.
And then where did you go to nursing school? That
was St. Louis University School of Nursing and
Health Sciences. Why did you decide to go into the
Army? At the time, there was a student nurse
program. You could join at the beginning of either
your junior or senior year and have an obligation
of two or three years. The Army picked up the tab,
the total tab, for tuition, fees,
room and board. We were paid first as... PFCs in the
WAC, Women's Army Corps. And then six months
before we graduated, we were commissioned second
lieutenants, and our pay went up accordingly.
During senior year, I was getting $348 a month,
plus school was paid for, and I owed two years. I had
done it during my senior year. And did you intend to
go to Vietnam? Vietnam was the farthest thing from
my mind. Even when I got to basic training at Fort
San Houston, that was in November of 67.
We were told then, and something should have told
us, I mean, this should have told us that something
was going on. It was a very, very large class,
probably 300 in the class. But we were told that no
one,
no nurses were in Vietnam except those who had
volunteered to go. They were actively recruiting
the male nurses at that time. And there were
between 40 and 50 of them in that class. And they
were asking for volunteers. By May, most of the
people that I knew from that basic class already
had orders to go. So things changed very
quickly. What did you consider to be your main
reason for being in Vietnam? Well, to help care for
the wounded. The motto
The theme of the Medical Service Corps is to
conserve the fighting strength. And I took that to
mean saving lives, taking
care of the wounded. And how much nursing
experience did you have before you went to
Vietnam? Not that much. I went on active duty in the
Army in September of 67. And of course we didn't get
to our first duty station until
early November. And I was in Vietnam the next
September, September of 68, so less than a year of
active duty work. After I graduated in the summer,
from June until September, we could not go on to
active duty until we had passed our state boards. I
had taken those in June, but we didn't get results
until early September.
How did they prepare you before you went? Well, we
had a five-week basic course at Port Sam. We
learned military protocol you know the marching
saluting how to wear the uniforms and there are
several uniforms
they had several ways of making sure that we knew
how to wear the uniform The blue, the army dress
blues are a little different. The insignia is just
a little bit different. And so that inspection was
a cocktail party where we all had to appear and be
presented to the general and so on. We had classes
on the military paperwork. It's different in
military hospitals. than it is from civilian
hospitals. They have their own forms and nursing
notes are much abbreviated in some cases, in many
cases.
And so we had to learn how to use the paperwork.
We went out probably every day for a week to Camp
Bullis. and wore our fatigues and ate from our mess
kits and attended classes on weapons
familiarization. We did not, the women nurses did
not shoot guns. We sat and watched these
demonstrations, but we did not actually fire
weapons. The men did. The men bivouacked
overnight, a couple of
nights. We were always treated like, this is fun,
hey. At the end of the day, when they bussed us back
into town, and it was a good 25 or 30 miles back into
town, they dropped us off first at the pit which was
the medical field service school's officers
club, and a real rocking place. I mean, it was fun.
It was a lot of fun. And they wanted us back there.
One day, they brought the Fort Sam Houston band out
to Camp Bullis, and the band played for us during
lunch. One day, we had... field rations, sea
rations, for lunch.
What were some other things we did? We went into
laboratories and practiced starting IVs,
practiced doing tracheotomies.
It seems like there was another procedure we
practiced. on goats. They had anesthetized the
goats and there'd be three or four of us at each
station with each goat practicing these
things. We had lectures on,
one lecture was on triage, how the casualties
would be divided you know, what decided or how it
was decided who went into surgery first.
They had a mock-up Vietnamese village, which was,
you know, just laughable. It was nothing like the
villages really were.
And what was your unit assignment and where were
you assigned? I went to the 24th of Ag Hospital on
Long Bend Post. That was about 16 miles, I think
southeast, sort of southeast of Saigon. They were
separated by a big interstate highway. It was just
a real quick trip by car into Saigon, or a quick by
chopper, too. There were two... Long Bend Post was
a huge post, probably the size of Fort Sam Houston.
Just really big, and it was just nothing but Army.
It was an area that had been scraped clean. And then
Army built... Army... buildings put up and a big
perimeter around it. And it served as a, I think it
really grew up, I heard once, really grew up after
Tet. They got a lot of the headquarters or whatever
out of Saigon and onto this place where they could
really secure them. They had a big population of
generals. They had acres and acres of, you know,
buildings or house trailers where senior
officers lived. There was a big jail there, I mean a
huge jail. Anyone in country that had to be put up a
while was brought down to the LBJ.
There was another evac hospital. It was on the
perimeter, and when I was given a choice, you know,
where I wanted to go, and that surprised me. I had no
idea I'd get to choose where I wanted to go. It was
explained that the 93rd was on the perimeter, and
occasionally took small arms fire, and the 24th
was more of a center of the post. I said, I want that
one. And I was tired also of... You know, it had been
a 23 hour trip over there. And I was very, very tired
and I was a little bit leery about traveling up
country too. I didn't think it was safe to go in a
jeep anywhere and I didn't think it was safe to go in
a chopper anywhere. So I was real glad to just stay
right there. And what were the living conditions
like? Very good. You know, very simple, but much
better than I expected.
We had four long wooden buildings. There was a
fifth one. That was the one in the middle. That one
housed the Officers Club. But then there were two
on either side that housed 10 to 12 rooms. And these
were private rooms. The buildings were designed
to, you know, not be air-conditioned. They were
screened and the walls were wooden slats out like
louvers. More than halfway up and then big
screened-in windows and then we're known. no
ceilings. Well, people had improved on those
quite a bit over time, and right away, somebody
insisted on building in my wall. I already had a
ceiling, and we shared a bathroom on the latrine,
about three sinks and three stalls. couple of
showers, but they were all inside that, you know,
that building. Concrete floors. You know, we
brought things in and it really made them pretty
comfortable. I had a bed with an innerspring
mattress.
Certainly not an army cot. Not a swayback army cot.
And how did you react to the injuries that you saw
when you first got there? The injuries?
I think I was just sort of numbed by the whole trip
over and just, you know, accepted what I saw. These
things stuck in my mind and I never forgot them or
eventually, you know, I started remembering them
again. But I don't remember ever turning away, you
know, being repulsed, not being able to look at
them or not being able to do for them. I mentioned
triage. One of the stages of triage
is a stage called expectant. And that's the stage
that you just don't try to do anything for. You can
tell that these people are still alive but they are
terribly wounded. Their wounds are going to
require hours and hours and hours of surgery and
then maybe you still won't get a good result. The
hospital I was assigned to was the neurosurgery
and maxillofacial surgery center for all of the
South, the South part of South Vietnam, for three
and four core. And we had a 50 bed neurosurgery
ward. Well, it was 45 to 50 beds. And, well, I don't
know how many beds for the maxillofacial.
certainly it was no more than one ward. But the
patients of ours that were labeled expectant were
the head injured. They were out of it and they knew
nothing. There's a certain way of stimulating
them that gives you a certain reflex that tells you
that the brain is gone. We did not have EEG
machines. You know, it was the equivalent of, you
know, these were flatline head injuries. And yet
they lived for a while. They could live for days.
And the thing I do remember is the very first day I
worked, and that was probably five or six days
after I had gone to that hospital, or a good week
after I'd come in country. That first day, there
were two American GIs that came in as expectants,
and they were
put at the back of the ward and just left there. And
then, you know, the things I had heard at Fort Sam
made sense. Back then, to me, it was something to
learn for a test. I mean, it really had no... Well, I
suppose at that time, I never thought I'd be in
Vietnam, for one thing. And then it really did hit
home that this is real. I was assigned to the pre-op
and recovery ward. The back end of the ward was
pre-op, where we held patients, kept them
stabilized, watched them, gave them additional
pain medicine if need be, hung extra blood and IV
fluids, reinforced their bandages, talked to
them. Just held them there until it was their turn
to go into surgery, which was next door to us. And
then the front half of the ward was set up as a
recovery ward. And it had everything around each
bed that you'd find here, or that you would have
found 20 years ago. And they came out of surgery
wrapped up, bandaged in clean bandages, white
bandages. And they looked like what you would find
back home after an accident. But the fellows as
they went in were still on the litters that they had
been picked up on. Their clothes had been cut away,
but they were still lying in what remained of their
clothes. Some of their bandages were the green
field dressing bandages. They had dirt, crud, you
know, they had the whole thing still attached to
them. They never did get really cleaned off.
Somebody who has done primarily OR or operating
room nursing would just really be appalled at what
we sent into the operating room. I mean, we sent
them in very dirty. And
there were some places that did attempt to clean
them off better before they sent them into, even
into the hospital. The third field hospital in
Saigon had a set of showers set up, shower heads set
up at the edge of their helipad. And before they
even took them into the hospital, they hosed them
down. You can imagine, you know, just being, you
know, those guys were already shocky from their
wounds. And then to get a blast of probably cold
water.
I don't know, I've forgotten the question. The
injuries.
The expectant head patients, I said, were kept put
in a corner in the back. I don't remember ever
seeing them up. another time when we had two
Americans there together. It was not unusual to
have two patients back there. You know, we
received Vietnamese patients, civilians, the
Arvins. We had VC Viet Cong and we had NVA, the North
Vietnamese Army.
We also had Cambodians at times. We had Koreans. We
called them ROKs, Republic
of Korean Soldiers. There was a Korean soldier who
came in once.
He was not really expected. He could have lived a
while. He had a very high spinal cord injury.
Spinal cord injuries, whatever part of the spinal
cord, they qualified as surgery patients and they
would come to our hospital too. He'd had a very high
one and the cord was severed so high that he wasn't
able to breathe on his own. And he was brought in,
and somebody was bagging him, you know, mashing
the ambu bag, breathing for him. He had a trach put
in, and two or three surgeons got into a fuss over
him. We had a unit attached to our hospital called
the RARE unit, the Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research. And I think all of the major medical
centers had a research team of some sort. Well,
Rare was over there. attached to our hospital and
doing trauma studies. And so anyone who had really
gross trauma, they did studies on. They did blood
tests. I don't know what else they did. I was aware
of the blood tests. What I was most aware of was that
they did blood gas studies on them. Actually, they
went into the artery and got samples of blood and
had the equipment to analyze it. This is not...
Well, I don't know how sophisticated the
equipment... The test is, but it's very necessary
equipment when you're dealing with chest wounds.
You need it for people
who've had, may need it for people who've had heart
attacks. There are a lot of things that are not
terribly abnormal or out of the ordinary that you
could use this test for, but it was not standard
equipment even for an evacuation hospital. And in
the back hospital, it was a pretty well-equipped
hospital.
Well, anyway, the rare team was there, and the
doctor in charge wanted that patient for his test.
He was not well-liked. He was kind of an obnoxious
type, and he didn't want to take care of him
afterwards. Most often, the patients, they'd
They
did the studies on the expectants and on others,
but they did not assume responsibility for the
patients afterwards. This fellow was going to
need a respirator. He was going to have to be on the
striker frame. It's a skinny little bed with sort
of a sandwich. You can turn the patient from front
to back. And you don't misalign his spinal cord by
turning him that way. And you can turn him easily.
And one doctor was screaming he was going to be
tying up a respirator. Another one was screaming
that Even if he lived and got out of our hospital
without a major infection, he would get one soon as
he got medevaced back to Korea. And the Koreans
didn't have the rehab. This is what this was, was a
rehab patient. Didn't have the rehab facilities
to take care of him. And so the three, in their
fussing and their fighting, I don't know that a
neurosurgeon was ever there. I can't remember who
the third fellow was. It may have been a
neurosurgeon, but I just can't remember. The
second was a general surgeon that was very, very
good. He was just an extremely good surgeon.
And I thought a lot of him. ended up the three of us
felt most fellows um two of them decided they would
put him down rather than take care of him and rather
than let the rare team have him and then notice him
the responsibility for him afterwards and it was
all over very very quickly it was this big scene
that you know the three of them were around yelling
and the nursing staff was You
know, started standing
around, what is going on here? What's going to
happen? And before you knew it, they had given this
man a bolus of, I don't know what it was, morphine,
Demo, and stopped bagging him. And he just, you
know, he just went out and was dead very soon. This
man had been trying to talk. Of course, he couldn't
talk with the trach in his throat unless it
recovered, and then he couldn't be back. But he was
trying to talk. There was another Korean there who
was watching this, who was telling him what was
going on or, you know, asking questions of him. I
thought about him a lot, not so much then. But in
these later years, it was very unusual for him to
have received medical care as quickly as he did.
Someone very quickly put a trach in his throat and
established an airway.
Either had a bag or actually blew into his chest. He
was trying to communicate. He was awake. You
know, the man would have lived a while. He had
things to say. And yet he was just put down. An
American soldier would have been operated on,
would have been given the chance. He may or may not
have gotten home, but he would have been operated
on.
Another time,
we were having a push of some sort. We call the mass
cow situations, masses of casualties.
We had a lot going on, a lot of patients in there, a
lot of doctors coming and going on the way into
surgery and so on. And this doctor came in pushing a
patient And the doctor was frantic. This fellow
had a tracheostomy and it was bleeding. It was
bleeding from around it and bleeding a lot. And he
was in distress. He wasn't getting enough air. And
the doctor grabbed me. And I hadn't been there very
long. And he said, I've got to revise this, this
trach. And, you know, I just, I stayed there with
him. He was very rattled. He was very scared
himself. And I didn't realize until later he had
not been in country very long himself. The fact
that he was a doctor didn't make him any less immune
to being shaken up by what he was, you know,
involved in. But the time, it shook me that he was so
shaken. But I just stayed right by him. I stayed at
the patient's head right across the gurney from
the doctor. And every time he asked for something,
I grabbed somebody going by or caught somebody's
eye and said, get me this, get me that. I didn't know
what he was doing. I certainly couldn't advise
him. But I calmed him down. I talked him through it.
And You know, he did revise the thing, got it in so
the fellow was breathing, and then they went off
into surgery. And I have no idea what happened
after
that. One time, one of the orthopedic surgeons
started working on a fellow. He just had a wound in
his foot, and it was one of these self-inflicted
wounds. And the surgeon was real mad about that. He
was just being very judgmental and screaming and
hollering. And carrying on, he asked for a tracer.
He said, I think I can debride this a little bit
here. I won't have to go into the,
you know, open up an operating room just for this
toe. And it was just the middle toe. And he started
working on it, working on it. And the kid was
screaming, giving more. when Lyda came, pretty
soon he had amputated that toe. He thought he was
just going to clean it up and tear away the dead
skin. And so he ended up amputating that toe right
there with just local anesthetic.
We had doctors who couldn't let go of their
patients.
They had a pretty good success rate. I don't
remember the exact statistics anymore. But it was
like 95% of the men who were picked up alive off the
battlefield and brought to a hospital lived. Now,
of course, there were degrees of living. But it was
amazing how many people did live with really
horrendous wounds. But they, you know, they
didn't like, they didn't like losing. And I
remember a patient who just went, he threw a
fatty embolus, a fat clot. It's a little worse
than, it's worse than a blood clot.
People can recover, but it's a major problem when
they do this. And this fellow did not recover. He
had a respiratory arrest. We went through all
that. I don't remember him ever being really awake
after that. And he was on a respirator. And he kept
going downhill
to the point of... He couldn't suction him. He had a
tracheostomy that was attached to the
respirator.
If you take him off the respirator long enough to
suction him, he'd stop. I mean, he was getting no
blood at all and no circulation. And yet the doctor
would scream at you to suction him. I remember, you
know, it was very obvious to me and everyone around
us that this guy was gone. He was just gone and had
been on the respirator, you know, long past the
time he should have been on it. He just barely
disconnected and his eyes were dilate
and he was waxy looking. And I remember having to
tell the doctor, just, you know, let it go. He's
gone.
You've got to take it home. I guess after so much
time expended on a
patient, you know, they can't save themselves.
This is
it for some care. There was a patient... He was on a
striker frame because he had so many wounds, but he
was difficult to turn and to manage. This recovery
end of the ward, it also functioned as our ICU, our
intensive care unit. There was no other place in
the hospital where the lights were always on and
where these difficult patients could be handled.
Any times, usually a recovery patient stayed with
us for one hour. That was about it. But the others,
we might have them for days and days. And so often
when we had them that long, that's the way they
left. I mean, they never went in. They never, they
died rather than going to another ward. And this
fellow was one. He had so many wounds all over. He
was just a multiple fragment wounded patient. And
that's the way they were carried, multiple
fragments.
And he had gotten infected. The wounds there were
not only the rips and tears, but these guys were
dirty when they were shot. They were apt to have
whatever was near them was apt to be blown into
their wound too. Or they fell into more yuck and
gucky stuff. Infection was just a real problem.
And he was badly infected.
He was pretty much out of it. He was running a fever.
He was delirious. This fennel lasted for about a
week. He lasted days. I don't know how long it was.
He was skinny. He was sort of light,
auburn-haired.
The sicker he got, the less we did for him in the way
of shaving. His beard was growing. He was
thin-faced. He seemed to get thinner. He was faced
longer and bags under his eyes, deeper and longer
as the days went on. He didn't have much to say. When
he was talking, he was kind of a country hick.
He was on this skinny bed that was barely as wide as
his shoulders.
There's no place for your arms on those striker
frames. They put out arm boards so that, you know,
there's a place for the arms. And then he had IVs
going in his arms. They had to be protected, and
they were managed. I can remember passing him once
and thinking, That's Jesus on the cross. That's
just what it looked like. And, you know, coming
from the Catholic tradition, I'm very familiar
with crucifixes, and so many of them all look
alike. It is a very thin, austere-looking man,
often a reddish-brownish hair,
and a just long, almost, is it Greco? The artist?
Mm-hmm. who is so elongated. And he fit that
picture. He could have been the model for, you
know, the crucifix I grew up seeing in my church, my
own church. And later on... you know, in the past
recent years that I have worked through all this,
you know, I came to realize, really, that was Jesus
on the cross. That's all of it. I mean, that's the
suffering Christ right here among us. He could
have been Vietnamese. He could have been the
enemy. He could have been the homeless people we
encounter. Any of the suffering, you know, that is
still happening It didn't hit me that way at the
time, it's just it was one of those pictures that I
always remembered, and I remembered what I
associated it
with at the time. Another patient I remember from
that ward was one of the head injured. And usually
those kids, even if they didn't have terrible head
injuries, even if they had the type that they were
going to recover from, they didn't wake up on the
recovery ward. Their vital signs reached a point
where they were safe to move to the ward, post-op
ward. But they didn't wake up. We didn't have a
whole lot of interaction with those patients
because the ICU patients were too sick. And the
patients coming into pre-op,
They were pretty much shocked, too. We just didn't
get to visit with them. This kid woke up very
quickly. We raised the beds of those head injured
patients as soon as it was safe to. And it was while I
was raising him up to a more sitting position, he
spoke. He said, hey, you're cute. And, you know, I
laughed at him. He said,
oh, my wife would kill me if she could hear me say
that. And then he said what I heard I don't know how
many times was,
I haven't seen a round-eyed woman in eight
months. He was wiped out on one side. It was as if he
had had a stroke. His injury had wiped out function
on
one side. And he looked down at himself and he said,
I was a steeplejack. I don't know exactly what he
meant by a steeplejack, but he had been used to
climbing around. And he knew, he knew that that was
gone. I don't know. I never worked on the post-op
neuro ward. I don't know how soon those guys talked
or any of the other wards where there were really
bad injuries. I don't know how soon they talked
about, if they did talk, what had happened to them
and what the ramifications were. This guy knew.
And there he was in the recovery room recognizing
it.
What
do you perceive as the differences between
nursing in a war zone and nursing at home in 1968?
Well, part of the difference was that motto I
taught you, conserve the fighting strength. The
idea in Vietnam was to get a guy, you know, patch him
up as best you could and hopefully get him back on
the battlefield. It was not necessarily to save
his
life. And that's, you know, that's what we did
at home. That's nursing,
medicine, that was the... That's what you always
hoped to do.
Maybe there were situations
where you would stop short of that, but certainly
not the number of times that you're ready to go and
be at home.
There was pretty sophisticated surgery done at an
EVAC hospital. It was different from a surgical
hospital. You know, you think of MASH. Well, that
was a surgery hospital. It was a surgical, a mobile
surgical hospital. And EVAC is where patients go
after the surgical hospital. Now, it was
different in Korea and Vietnam in that in Vietnam,
the capacity of the choppers was so much greater
than it had been. That whole medevac system had
been refined. There were many, many choppers.
People were trained. They carried medics on them.
They didn't have just pilots. They actually had
medics who could, you know, do procedures while
they were in flight, while they were en route to the
hospital. And if the chopper was closer to the back
hospital, that's where they went. Or somebody who
had a head wound, for instance, it was, you know,
you could go fly just a little bit longer and make it
to the 24th. All the head wounds, all the spinal
cord injuries that happened in that
area,
in three and four core area, eventually came to our
hospital. And, you know, distances were not
terribly great, you know. It was not an initial for
somebody to be taken directly to the 24th and back.
I forgot the question. There's differences in
nursing.
there
would still need to be some patients had to have
different added let's say, added procedures done
a little bit later. After having been in Nam, they
might have them done in Guam or Tokyo, whereas in
the stateside, you know, someone, an accident
victim would have everything done. You know, the
wound would be taken care of properly, completely
finished, maybe, you know, with one surgery.
Were you aware of any drug abuse when you were in
Vietnam? I knew of some, but really only
secondhand. I mean, I saw none. Well, no, I won't
say I saw none. It was not the horrible problem that
it became, say, a year or two years later. One of the
corpsmen who had worked on the pre-op recovery
ward I'd been getting into trouble with it. I
really wasn't that aware of it on the ward, and I
never hung around the enlisted area, living area.
But evidently, he used up all his chances and was
rotated out to the field as a medic. And there he
continued his problem. And I remember him coming
in once, coming back into the hospital. I think
he'd come in for treatment. And he had patches on
both arms inside the elbow. And I said, what
happened? And he said he had taken frag wounds. And
then he showed them to me. They weren't frag
wounds. Nope, nope, nope, nope, nope.
I knew a nurse who was abusing Ritalin, I think. She
was always up. She was just always
up and smiling and
very happy-go-lucky and working hard and this and
that. And she came to me one night, I don't know
whether she was working nights or whether she was
just up trolling around, and asked for Ritalin.
And, uh-huh, this is why you're always so up. There
are a number of books out, a couple of them, three of
them I know of, about women who've been in Vietnam.
And one of them, they each have different stories.
Each chapter is one woman's story, and they all
include nurses. One of them is... that of a girl who
was at the 24th, about 18 months after I was. And she
talks about the drug problems being just very
rampant.
I think things did deteriorate. It got worse.
Morale got
worse. I knew things went on there. I had another
corpsman who smoked pot very frequently.
But it just wasn't very obvious. A lot of drinking.
A lot of drinking. And I don't think even then I
would have called that a drug problem. I do now.
People partied hard when they got off work. And it
always included drinking.